//Data Ingestion//

Source Once, Use Many Times	
	Want to reuse data and future-proof.
	Get an agreement for a comprehensive data feed from the source, as well as periodic updates.
	Include all records, entities, and attributes at the lowest level of granularity.
	Data must come from the master source, not an intermediate (e.g. another data warehouse).
One Way In
	Data feeds can arrive in different ways, but there must be only one pathway for data to enter the warehouse.
	Data must not be able to get landed in downstream stages.
No Data Without Metadata
	No data feeds accepted without appropriate metadata.
	Metadata must be provided for datasets / elements that have been created from the received data.
Retain-As-Received
	Store data feeds as-is (e.g. no filtering, transformation, aggregation etc.)


//Data Processing//

Process All Data
	All incoming data must be loaded, processed, and made available for provisioning.
Store Record-Level Data
	Data must be stored at the lowest level of granularity available.
	Data must be structured so it is flexible enough to meet current and future requirements.
	Storing granular data offers the most flexibility.
Maintain Change History
	Change history must be maintained for the data elements.
	When an element of a record changes, the old version must be retained (i.e. create a new row).
	In some cases, change history is not required and the element can be overwritten, but this is not recommended.
	Alternatively, there may be situations where just the current and previous values are needed.
Create Consistent Keys
	Surrogate keys (system generated keys) must be assigned when data is cleaned and integrated.
	These keys must be retained, unchanged, in all downstream layers.
	This enables data-linking and tokenisation of PII.


//Data Provision Principles//

One Way Out
	Consumer access must be provided in a controlled way.
	Technical users, such as data scientists, can be given access to underlying layers.
Share Data
	Data from various feeds should be integrated into various views and shared with authorised users.
Common Controlled Vocabulary
	All technical and business users must have a common understanding of vocabulary.
	Terms must have a unique, non-ambiguous definition.
	Common vocabulary should be maintained centrally by a designated team.
Legal and Regulatory Compliance
	Data stores and processes must comply with all laws, policies, regulations, and standards.
	They must also comply with any restrictions imposed by the data supplier, commonly through a service level agreement (SLA) or memorandum of understanding (MoU).
