Tables:

	Hubs (H, HUB, HB)
		Unique list of business keys.
		Must have at least one Business Key driven field.
		Cannot contain multiple distinct business keys (e.g. Account Number and Invoice - these are distinct and should have their own hubs with a link joining them).
		Should have at least one satellite. Without it, hubs have no context.
		Business key must stand alone - it must be system generated (surrogate key) or be the single basis for finding the information in the source system (natural key).
		Load date can be a field, but must only be an attribute of the hub not a natural key.


	Links (L, LINK, LNK)
		Unique list of relationships / interactions between two or more business keys.
		Contains two or more imported primary keys. Never depends on another link.
		Can have two keys imported from the same hub to show a heirachical rleaitionship. Can only do this once per link - need to have mutiple links for deeper heirachy. Also need a satellite to contain information on when the relationship is valid.
		Load date can only be an attirbute of the link.
		Composite key (combination of keys from parent hubs) must be unique.
		Link can have a satellite.
		Links never contain begin or end dates - temporal validity is stored in a satellite.
		A link must represent, at most, 1 instance of a relationship for all time,.

	Satellites (S, SAT)
		Purpose is to store data over time.
		Delta driven descriptive information (Data that changes over time).
		Driven by 'change data capture' and are split by rate of change or type (classification of data).
		Cannot be attached to more than one parent hub or link.
		Must have load-date time stamp as part of its primary key.
		Must contain record source for traceability.
		Must contain at least one descriptive attribute for the parent hub / link.
		May contain system / business rule generated attributes.

		Multi Active Satellite:
			Contains multiple child records which have no natural business key e.g. list of multiple active addresses for an employee, as the addresses do not have a properly formed unique business key. 

		Effectivity Satellite
			Holds temporal views of a hub or link i.e. contains a start and end date that describe when a relationship (link) or business key (hub) was in effect.
			Never allowed to be updated physically.

	Stand Alone Tables
		Reference tables (e.g. calendar and time).
		Do not have any delats ever.
		Contents immutable and agreed by business globally.

	Point in Time (PIT, PT)
		Holds primary / natural keys from a single hub or link (and its surrounding satellites).
		Contains snapshots of keys and key structures.

	Bridge (B, BRIDGE, BR)
		Contains combination of keys across multiple hubs and links.
		Base level fact table.
		Generally not temporal in nature.

Fields



